VIZ talk outline

I. Viz is about communication, telling a story

II. Plots (group meetings, papers, slides)

  o  plotting basics
  o  plotting symbols
  o  color (COLOR)
  o  

III.  Design (slides)









Short notes on the many papers by Wong and Krzywinski:

Wong 2010 - Color coding
Color is best for categorical data
Rip Fig 1 - 
Hue, saturation, lightness
Rig Fig 2 - 
(more than 6-8 colors is nearly impossible to distinguish)

Wong 2010 - Design of data figures
graphs - perceive patterns and trends; tables - precise numbers and names
Rip Figure 1 -- 
hue is weak for illustrative values
Get Table 1

Wong 2010 - Salience
The design lesson is fairly straightforward. To make something easy to find, make it stand out by varying the object's primary visual feature. For example, give the object a color, size or orientation that is substantially different from that of the other objects on the page.

Rip Fig 1 - 
?? Rip Fig 2

Wong 2010 - Gestalt Principles (Part 1)
principles proposed to explain how people organize visual information
(visually assemble individual objects into groups)

Gestalt Principles (Part 2)
Use Figure 1 -- lesson on how we fill things in

Wong 2010 - negative space
"the lungs of good design"
science = densely packed, overcrowded slides and posters are hard to comprehend
Rip Fig 2

Wong 2011 - Points of View
Hue is terrible at encoding information
Rip figure 1 and figure 2


Wong 2011 - Typography
sans serif for slides; serif for blocks of text and posters

Wong 2011 - Color Blindness
Fig 2 might be useful

Wong 2011 - Avoiding Color
Can be useful to avoid color as it has low impact on perception
Rip Fig 2 

Wong 2011 - Simplify to Clarify
But the opportunity lost from including less is gained in greater emphasis on what is shown

Wong 2011 - Arrows
When arrows are added to diagrams, they are most readily interpreted as conveying change, movement or causality [best for functional relationships rather than the elements themselves]
Rip Fig 2

Wong 2011 - Layout
layout underlies everything we do when we communicate visually

Grids help to anchor content and create stability within a design. They also build consistency between slides that allows the audience to anticipate where content will appear.

Rip Fig 2 ??

Wong 2011 - Salience and Relevance 

It is particularly important to ensure that salience aligns with relevance in visuals used for slide presentations.

(put towards the beginning of presentation)
In these situations, information transmission needs to be efficient because the audience member is expected to simultaneously listen and read. 

What stands out is often taken as most important or relevant.

Rip Fig 1 and Fig 2

Wong 2011 - The Design Process
For example, a subway map is a highly efficient tool for figuring out how to get from one part of a city to another. If the train information were presented in a table of stops and connections, the job of finding the shortest route between two points would still be possible but much more difficult. When designing scientific figures, it helps to develop a well-organized approach for depicting the information.

Well-founded design ideas and technical execution are essential to creating professional work. Take the time to master the graphic software you depend on most. It is imperative that the creative process is not restricted by the medium. Design is an exploratory process that requires realizing what is in one mind's eye and the ability to fluidly refine the graphical characteristics as needed.

Rip Fig 2?

Shoresh & Wong 2012 - Data Exploration
In exploration, the researcher suspects that regularities are present but does not know exactly what they are.
Rip Fig 1 & Fig 2

Gehlenborg & Wong 2012 - Heat maps
Color can be unreliable
-- not as useful as a ref for this talk

Gehlenborg & Wong 2012 - Mapping quantitative data to color
Rip figure 1

Gehlenborg & Wong 2012 - Into the 3rd dimension
Only useful for spatial data
Occlusions and perspective really mess up 3d figures
Rip figure 2


Gehlenborg & Wong 2012 - Power of the Plane
Data visualization methods such as parallel coordinate plots and scatter plots displayed in an array can be highly useful 2D visualization techniques for high-dimensional data. They represent data using location on a plane, and each has its own strength for highlighting different aspects of the data.

Rip Fig 1 - parallel plots is really interesting (not something I've done before)

Krzywinski 2013c - Axes, Ticks, & Grids

good use provides more accurate assesment of the data
(data-to-ink ratio high –– use least amount of ink as possible for navigational elements)
Rip Fig 1 (different styles for axes, contours, and cluster boundaries)
reduce nonsignificant digits in tick marks
Rip Fig 2
Rip Fig 3 -- better than Figure 2


Krzywinski 2013 - Labels and callouts
consistently place labels, use similarity to promote Gestalt principles
Rip Fig 1

Krzywinski 2013 - Elements of Style
translate effective (design section)
Rip Figs 1, 2, 3
"revise and redraw"

Krzywinski 2013 - Multidimensional Data
Rip Fig 1 - good for intro and talking about multiple dimensions

Krzywinski & Cairo 2013 - Storytelling
Familiar elements underpin most stories: introduction, question, conflict, buildup and resolution.

“If your study were reported in the newspaper, what would the headline be?”

Rip Fig 1 - don't let the audience draw their own conclusions

apply storytelling to create a cohesive whole


Perception in Visualization - Healey (https://www.csc2.ncsu.edu/faculty/healey/PP/)

preattentive processing: tasks that can be completed in <250 ms
(example - detect red circle in a group of blue); unique visual property allows the target to be identified

non-unique properties (conjunction target) is more difficult to find

If low-level visual system can be harnessed, it can be used to draw attention to specific aspects of the display

explanation of pre-attentive processing
  o  Feature Integration Theory (pre-attentive tasks do not scale with N, serial search does)
  
  o  Texton Theory -- ??
  o  Similarity Theory –– T-N similarity and N-N similarity
  o  Guided Search Theory –– 
  o  Boolean Map –– all maps can only be divided in boolean fashion (first red vs. blue THEN vertical vs. horizontal)

post attentive vision –– In most cases, visualization displays are novel, and their contents cannot be committed to long-term memory. This means that studying a display may offer no assistance in searching for specific data values. In this scenario, methods that draw attention to areas of potential interest within a display (i.e., preattentive methods) would be critical in allowing viewers to rapidly and accurate explore their data.

feature hierarchy –– for boundary detection, visual system prefers color over shape


Robin Williams' 4 basic design principles

Proximity, alignment, repetition and contrast

design is everywhere, and it's easy to recognize "bad" but difficult to know how to transition to good

PROX - Items relating to each other should be grouped closely together. When several items are in close proximity, they become one visual unit rather than several separate units. Logical connection ==> visual connection

alignment - GESTALT! invisible lines can be used to connect text (center alignment is safe and feels comfortable)

Repetition - unifies all parts of a design with a conscious effort

Contrast - if items do not belong to the same unit, then make them different; strong contrast is dynamic and eye-catching; contrast allows a reader to instantly understand the way that information is organized